Yes. But anyway, congratulations for that. Now, we've got a bit of time with you this morning.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say. As a committee, as you know, we love
asking questions. I have become accustomed to that reality,
but you come to me just to make some, for this occasion, very short remarks, just to try and
frame the conversation and shape some of the questions. So thanks, firstly, for inviting us to
talk to you about the long-term insight briefing. And I think you also wanted to maybe spend a
short amount of time on the Mendeima's order. Yes. We've got one member particularly interested.
Everyone should be interested if you need to talk about the legal situation.
So we asked you a bit. Awesome. So I'll cover that in my opening remarks just in terms of framing it,
because I am able to talk about it to a level and then there are some limitations.
But can I just make sure I've introduced my colleagues listening at the table?
You are familiar, I think, with Dr Anita Ryan, Deputy Chief Executive of my
community's partnerships and pathways, and Tom Baker, who's a Chief Digital Officer.
So they're both here. I've seen the Chief Digital Officer's role here is not needing to be explained.
And Anita obviously brings lots of insight around the regulatory and integrative services,
where we think it's a good opportunity. And also at the moment,
it's covering the community partnerships and pathways space, where also technology has a quite
significant role to play. Corrections, LTB on potential technology changes,
looks over the next 25 years and focuses on areas where technology could potentially help to address
issues that may arise in the future. So very importantly, framing this, this is future focused,
long-term in outlook to help us plan. Technology is already an important part of our
operations. I think we've spoken in the past about corrections officers already utilising
body wall cameras for body scanners, having been introduced at some of our prison sites
and what that's then enabled in terms of reducing strip searching, enabling same activity to be done
in a much less intrusive way, both for those in our care, as well as the officers who work
in that environment. Other technologies including virtual reality for training purposes
have been trial successfully in some sites. Prisons though, and I think this is the
important point to set context, prisons specifically are by design and necessity
environments, often built with steel reinforced concrete, particularly in the high
security maximum security environment. And therefore introducing new technology,
particularly on existing assets can be difficult and expensive, sometimes making
hearts take full advantage of all available technology, both now and into the future.
Despite that, we are focused on having a plan for how that can be introduced progressively,
taking advantage of technology where it makes sense, but is also affordable.
The LTIB looked at three key areas where technology could be used in the future
to add value or improve efficiency or safety, those being in prisons, in the community,
and as I've said in the rehabilitation or integration space. I thought that would be
a helpful focus into those three areas because that's kind of how we thought about it in the
LTIB. Before I finish, just on the specifics of the mandamus order, just again to help frame
what I will be able to talk about rather than what is still subject to proceedings,
I will just briefly talk on mandamus order and the work that is underway as a result.
It's important to note that the order arose during existing proceedings and while it's
somewhat independent, I'm going to caveat some of my answers given the wider matter is still
subject to say. So I'll just be clear about where those two things sit and where I want to maybe
take a step back from the specifics and give you context rather than answering any specific
questions. The order requires that I as Chief Executive am required to comply with Section 70
of the Corrections Act in the Administration of Conditions, specifically of detention in
units 12 and 13 at Auckland Prison. That's the maximum security environment and the order
arose during proceedings focused on two units at Auckland Prison related to Section 70 of the
Act which provides the detailed amendment type of exercise. In short, the judgment touched
on several issues, including not consistently meeting open air requirement often due to
infrastructure constraints, the conflation of exercise and time out of cell and that inadequate
resourcing was not a lawful basis for denying minimum entitlements. We have responded to this
so it was important that we heard, understood and then took action around the issuing of
that mandamus order responding by increasing resourcing, looking at new approaches to
unlock regimes to meet the requirements of the order and I can confirm that the circumstance of
the game rise to the order have not occurred since those changes have been made. So I'll give that
as a frame to hopefully then enable as much of a constructive conversation as possible whilst not
travelling into the lives of... This is nothing to appeal, is that what you're saying? That's what
I was wondering. No, sorry it is and we are not appealing that at all. So are you
finished now? Yes, I am. Right, I'm going to go to Timothy Paul, you first to ask the questions.
Yeah, can we just clarify that because before we did a bit of research about whether this was
still ongoing and our understanding was it was corrections, was it applied for an appeal and
that was denied by the judge and now that it just is settled? We are not, we're not appealing
the mandamus order sands but it is still part of a wider, I think the term is interlocutory
set of matters that is still a live case in the High Court. So that's the interrelationship
between the two. There's an order, that is something that we had to apply and comply with
from the end of last year and I can talk to that but I'm not going to talk about any of the wider
implications of the case because that would be subject to you to say. Yeah, okay. So you go?
Yeah, so over the last two years this committee and a few briefings and during scrutiny week
have asked yourself and your leadership whether corrections is meeting minimum entitlements
and from my recollection it was always Lee Marsh who would answer a lot of the minimum entitlement
questions. Every time corrections said to us that you guys were meeting the minimum entitlements
so I was a bit of a shock to see the High Court order last year. So what genuine assurances
can corrections give to our committee that this is not just going to be a slap on the
wrist for Auckland Prison? What are you doing to oversee the fulfilment of those entitlements in
every single prison and what would be the consequences for the operation of Auckland
Prison not meeting statutory obligations? Correct. Okay, well I'll I think take a step back in
terms of the specifics of the mandamus order which was related to units 12 and 13 of Auckland
Prison rather than any far any sort of wider findings. The context of those two units as
you'll be aware I think you've visited that environment is that they are managing the most
complex violent people in our system and within that context we have put in place
regimes that try and prioritise what is in our guiding principles of the Corrections Act under
Section 6 maintaining public safety as our primary and paramount consideration in decision making.
What that meant for us on a day-to-day operational basis prior to the mandamus order
was that we were very much wanting to and attempting to achieve minimum entitlements
particularly the one-hour access to fresh air every day and what we were discovering every day
that was that the nature of the volatility of the individuals and the care required to ensure we
were not inappropriately mixing prisoners in their open air space to avoid serious assaults and harm
of prisoner on prisoner as much as the potential for serious assaults to our officers
that we were seeing incidents that then enabled us to apply an exception to
achieving minimum entitlements under 69 to B and C which are enabling us for reasons of security of
prison the prison operations being threatened or health and safety of any person in the prison
being threatened lawful reasons for why we would in those situations not apply minimum entitlements.
Our step back working through this case and responding to the order has been for us to
confront what we I think had drifted into given the complexity of the people and our desire
to achieve that paramount consideration of public safety we had probably normalized as
poor regime routine in those two units exceptions almost every day as a result of concerns of
threats to safety and health and safety what now having engaged with the order and having reflected on
the judge's clear consideration and therefore issuing of something that is you know obviously a
very substantive position is that we needed to take a step back and say well what do we need to do
to ensure that we can still account for the safety of our staff who do incredibly difficult
work every day with those most violent people in our system but still accounts for that as the
norm because that is that is what that unit is achieving and we need to address the resourcing
of people to enable us to operate regime that normally can achieve those minimum entitlements
so that was the big change for us in mindset that we weren't operating on a default of well
this is just this is just the resourcing that we've applied historically to running a maximum
security environment we now need to think well what additional resources do we need so what
I can confirm as a result of that ruling that order we've invested two million dollars per year
in additional frontline staff capability specifically to those units that has increased
the amount of officers who are available increased the number of movements that can occur has
anticipated the complexity of the interrelationships and has made a safe working operation that
now properly sees exception rather than default being threat of prisoner safety or health and
safety concerns every day so I can confirm that we are now recording every day with absolute
consistency the adherence to an achievement of minimum entitlements and where that is not
achieved and I think it's important to note because some days it won't be we've got really
clear documentation that 69 to b or c one or other has applied that then justifies why and
we're explicit that that is not as a result of us not adapting and adjusting our staffing and
operating regime regime and I think to your broad question of how can we be assured that
doesn't apply elsewhere this particular part of our network and our system is it you know if
you can make a triangle of highest risk most complex right at the top this is right at the top of
that organizational construct and therefore I am assured because we now have that same record
of minimum entitlement achievement across our network that this was the exception and this
was the area where we had prioritized as paramount requirement public safety and that had allowed
us to drift into not saying actually things have changed the complexity in nature of the prisoners
has become more unpredictable more violent and we now need probably to consider different resourcing
to one where the operations weren't weren't kind of putting their hand up we unfortunately needed
this order to allow us to properly go in and say so it's got a change we need to adopt a
roof regime allows us more normally to maintain those minimum entitlements you got another question
well I mean I was keen to dunk on me oh just suck on that yeah it's just that last comment
maybe really rose an eyebrow which was we needed this order you knew once it was drawn to your attention
and it clearly was prior to proceedings being filed you knew you weren't complying with illegal
obligations why did it why did it require a judge a hearing and a judge to say do what the law says
to for the corrections to respond in the way it has if I'm a our view of our position was that
we were lawfully applying the intent of the act I referenced the section six principles the
paramount consideration being public safety above all other things and therefore it does it did
need to be tested and so from our perspective so your view if I've got the case right your view
was you were having resourcing constraints which meant you couldn't safely
deliver under section 70 and that was justified is that essentially in a nutshell your case
that is a that is a simplified version of how we were operating the site we had considered
the risks and the considerations of how we achieved safe operations in that particular
unit those two two units and our response was to ensure safety with the paramount consideration
and how we then worked our way through that was ensuring that we could confirm that first before
anything else and that was the way in which officers in the in the line of fire so to speak
were considering their ability to weigh on a case by case day by day basis whether or not
what they were experiencing with a particular prisoner being particularly aggressive or
particularly violent on that day amounted to a justification for exception two and that just
gave us the opportunity to reflect having heard from a judge how they had interpreted the law
right and because there are exceptions in cases of emergency and so on to not comply with
and and threats to safety of prisoners or staff and threats to health and safety but what has
been proven by your the case and your actions is that properly resourced this was a systemic
problem of under resourcing rather than some ongoing emergency. That's a question. Well I would
be happy to debate that in terms of until we got that crystallized for us our proposition was we
were weighing two very complex and careful things about what is the bar what are the standards of
69 to BNC in every single circumstance for every single prisoner in that most complex space
and whether or not and I think this is what I've tried to convey whether or not
in each circumstance we had drifted into a mode where we were almost assuming
because of the people who were managing there that every day we were going to
have a set of circumstances where there would be exceptions that would mean
minimum type of that's what I meant. From what I heard you say before
my read why not you said before it's different entries in the interpretation
is that you hadn't the way you are operating you you had interpreted the law
to be be such that you could operate the way you operate right correct and so up to the
point of the time the judge came up with his opinion it was that that point is that what
because that's what I thought you was exactly it's exactly it's exactly what I was trying
but now what you've said is now that you recognize you obviously recognize the decision
you're spending too many in a year to find right okay yeah I'm making my question
wrap into the long term because like I appreciate the answer but this is not the first time that
corrections has been challenged over the provision of minimum entitlements because
during COVID obviously there was a crisis that justified the reduction of meeting those targets
but when we moved out of lockdown and when it was safe to go back to normal
corrections were not I think it was at Arohata women's prison were not meeting
minimum entitlements so this is not the first time that this has come up which is what makes
me wonder whether this is a system-wide issue and from my observations I wonder whether
this is going to the long term but hang on just please let me finish
it seems to me that a lot of the resourcing is going towards increasing capacity of our
prisons and managing the increase in prison population which has increased by nearly a thousand
people during your tenure as chief executive of corrections as opposed to the quality of providing
the basic minimum entitles entitled to every prisoner regardless of the severeness or seriousness
of their offender what you are describing is the period at the end of during and then at
the end of COVID where I think I have come to this committee in its various forms and acknowledged and
talked about the weighing of public safety being paramount our needs to ensure that we had sufficient
staff who were able to then undertake safe work as we were transitioning and experiencing high
turnover the need to recruit as demand increased and how we managed those tensions across our
network so what what I would acknowledge is as a result of context changing and our need to be able
to account for ourselves absolutely explicitly that we were achieving minimum entitlements
which historically were just that we are you know for for the previous period from 1995 until
2022 23 there was there was no explicit documented position that was assuring everyone that every
single person was achieving every single minimum settlement in every single day but for the exceptions
we are now in a position where COVID and the period out required us to be able to evidence
that we were achieving those things and what we are now this is where the technology kind of link
comes in we are now in a mode where we have the opportunity starting in unit 12 and 13 at
Auckland prison to start to remove the need for officers to be tied up using their own
documented approach to recording all of these things and try and prioritise their time being
connected to those in our care rather than documenting those things so we are not in a
place where it's a it's a live thing yet but what we have seen in this work is humans
undertaking lots of documented record keeping is not the most effective and efficient beneficial
use of their time where technology can play a part potentially is the use of CCTV camera footage
the connection of that back into our systems and that's become more of an automated approach to
that absolute credible auditable document documented record freeing up officer time
so that's that's for us what I think extending our existing technology to something that will help us
in the future reduce the the administrative burden on our officers free them up to spend more time
and create an even stronger evidence trail than the date that we have today because it's a human
based system rather than a machine based system at the moment can I just I won't give back
the members original question and I think she's the second time she's asked the question
what what this committee wants to be assured is as of today can you give assurance to the committee
that the minimum standards of whatever minimum size whatever way you do it where that's for you
but the committee wants to be assured that you are meeting those and if you're not
we would love to know where you have areas of concern and by when you expect to address it I
think that was what member was originally asking about that so I can keep it short but I can keep
it short and say yes we are achieving those and our assurance process for that is we now have
measures for every single member entitlement for every single prisoner at every single site
and that is being reported on a daily basis so what all I'm reflecting on in terms of
then moving into the technology is that is a resource administratively burdensome part of
an officer's day which is important that we can do from accounting for ourselves and
demonstrating adherence but technology in the future has probably got a really important part
to play in being able to automate that part of what our responsibilities are to then free back up
officer time which I think is far more appropriately spent engaging with those in our care trying to
get them on a more positive pathway so they leave us better with broader prospects so that's the
that's the that's the link if you like between an important conversation and okay I'm going
to go to a new line of questioning now to Mr Todd Simpson well thank you all kind of pick up because
I think obviously you said technology focus in that insights briefing long term it's briefing
community prisons rehabilitation I think we've covered prisons a bit but keen to understand a
bit more yeah what you're thinking in the rehabilitation space because yeah kind of what
did you uncover in putting together the briefing around how technology could help because obviously
yeah we want to make sure that there is opportunities for people that here in
good care to get rid of yeah yeah so so I think acknowledging in my setup that there are really
material barriers to just introducing what we might all view as normal technology into
into prison context that the hard infrastructure part we have significant pilot examples where
the use of things like virtual reality which has been used particularly for the education
part of our services is a really valuable vehicle to drive engagement to drive connection to something
beyond the institutional setting and can can really give a lift to the educational attainments
that would otherwise perhaps not be as beneficial so I think our reflection is virtual reality
is a really valuable tool that's been particularly effective I say in education and training
giving people access to some certification qualification that otherwise might not be as
practical within a prison context and it's shown real gains in terms of those things
I'll turn to my colleagues who are probably much more knowledgeable on this but I would say
what we have seen in other jurisdictions is a move to then include more than education and training
within that virtual reality space and that for me is quite an interesting area to watch because
I you know at a human level I can perhaps appreciate with what is possible now with virtual reality
the opportunity to move people out of what they would have as their day-to-day world
is something very different which might be super helpful in helping them shift their behaviors
and mindset so that might be an interesting area to focus on that one might have a view and then
Tom from a from a delivery perspective and then the second bit is secure online learning
and the ability to ensure that we are keeping abreast with how training and education is being
delivered with those normal politic type courses and it's been critical for us to be able to shift
our mode to enable more and more access of an online nature rather than what has historically
been necessary to be our model face-to-face delivery and that is becoming less and less
the mode for some of that delivery but I don't know whether you've got any reflections when
either around virtual reality broadening those to other services what you might have as a
perspective in terms of how that might work with kind of evidence and practice in some of
those services because they'll be pros and cons right yeah there will be and in terms of
virtual reality within a that the offense focus rehabilitative context I'm actually not
aware of how that is being utilized overseas specifically but I do know virtual reality more
widely for mental health services for some forms of specific illnesses that people might have has
been trialled from probably the late 90s in New Zealand around how we support people to overcome
some of those within kind of real time or real looking contexts so some of that would be particularly
useful for us to consider in a prison context where it's also very challenging for people to be
in the real life context and the relevance of that to us I think is that that helps set people up
for mental health barriers that are really challenging them to engage in offense focus
rehab proper as Jeremy said in terms of virtual reality for education we've had some really good
trials of this within the Department of Corrections and with some really good outcomes in terms of
people being able to achieve some new CA level results not across the spectrum of or across the
suite or across the country but certainly something that we are seeing some new green shoots
from so I'm going to Dr Tracen McLenna thank you Mr Chair I made a couple of questions and Tom
you're probably best place to answer and because the long-term briefing is really no free lunch is
here Tom but the briefing is really interesting so I'm pleased that you're turning your mind to
all of the you know the potentials out there but plans it's really important that the plans
remain adaptable as you'll know because rather than being sort of locking in systems
that are quickly going to be outdated so I'm assuming that that's forming part of your
thinking as well and also so that's one question and also noting that you know the report talks
about how new tech can change how crime is detected and managed so have you also considered
whether that sort of increased use of tech could itself drive changes in prison demand over time I
don't know if that was sufficiently sort of taken into account and okay that's through those two
we're running out of time a bit yeah my interactions with my peers and colleagues not just in New
Zealand but in Australia suggest that not really in reduction of crime however there is a view
around how we could detect just certain interactions between individuals within the custodial environment
and then what could come about as a result of the data that then falls out of that that we could then
leverage you know for prisons operations perspective because you can imagine a situation where internal
charges like changes the nature of of of teaching what you're monitoring isn't it yeah absolutely
um do you just want to touch on I think the first question was sort of pushing into the
how do you maintain progress long-term view of where you're trying to get to without what you're
doing becoming outdated before before you've even done it did I feel some of that in your question
that sort of speaks to the three phases of your digital SLI yeah yeah yeah so our focus in our
digital statement intent is about strengthening and transforming and so what what we're attempting
to do with that is stay connected to again my peers both here and not just in the public sector
the private sector but also across the ditch in Australia so on behalf of corrections I chair the
emerging technologies our group of people that sit across the corrections environment and we meet
quite regularly every quarter and the things that we talk about and discuss is the emergence of
technology and the longevity longevity of that in terms of its use within our environment so we
focus on particular areas topics that we've touched on virtual reality we have talked about that in
the education space that has limited time we've talked about AI seems the topic this year
of the day and we know that that in and of itself will have limited time span as well so we're
trying to think beyond that what what are the next things that come along that we might have to
turn our minds to in terms of supporting our particular function in our environment
and and I think you know think think about our integration for management system which is which
is our core platform where data exists to give us information about every single person in their
care case-noting ability to search document that's a legacy legacy system an old system
which has been maintained over time we're part of a wider justice system as you well know so the
interrelationship between a police system a justice system and a correction system that need to seamlessly
interact but are at different stages creates a sort of similar tension for us in terms of
when do we when do we start thinking about what might be next as a different legacy system
versus what do we need to do today to maintain stabilised but sort of improve and enhance the
existing system so I think IOMS is a really good example of how we get confidence and assurance
that we have a stable platform whilst Teldeca is being introduced as the case management system
within the courts part of justice so that we are ready with a stable platform to then start to
consider how we might shape our future systems as that starts to come in to perhaps think about
and I think this is this is a really important principle that we've used as a department
we have to know that we have been really disciplined in a way in which we articulate
the operational activities that we want to happen in a particular way the workflow
before we start ambitiously describing what the technology needs to be so until we describe
the workflow activities that will help that work achieve our outcomes we're not yet ready for
the technology so we're putting the effort into that whilst Teldeca is coming on so that we're in a
position to we're running out of time I'm going to have two more questions one more from Tracey
yeah so I and that largely answered it so so I assume making sure that you're able to measure
and monitor correct so that it's in service of rehab and reduce reoffending not just throughput
correct okay ten was it Paul that's all right so like long-term looking at the makeup of the
prison population accepting you know that you don't make the law there has been
accepting all of that the proportionate Māori in prison is still worryingly high
it seems that attempts or efforts to refresh whakai rangi despite this committee recommending that
have not gone anywhere and I'd love to hear an update if that's if I'm wrong on that
the there was a decision made to remove the Māori leadership advisory board to your leadership
and and then to look at woman the woman's prison population that's shot up recently
under your leadership there have been the Waikete riots the escape high-profile escape of
Philip Smith and other really serious incidents and incidents of escapes
resulting in innocent members of the public being long-term insights so long-term insights
long-term insight how are you going to change all of that because it's not a great record okay
I am that's not even touching on the internal allegations of bullying and internal cultures
that is in the media right now yeah I mean that's a that's a lots of questions I mean my my short
answer to that is we work in a very complex part of the wider system of public services I am
incredibly proud of the work that everyone undertakes every day within corrections
context we are but one important part of a whole heap of different agencies
and parties that together leads to the consequences that you have described
we have been committed to ensuring that we are confronting some of the realities in our part
of the system you mentioned the bullying matters and I reference our approach to speaking up
standing up sexual harassment being an absolute focus for us and the over 2,300 people within
our organization have already been through really extensive training not because we've
told them they must but because they have determined that it's the right thing to do as a result us
pushing in and saying it's incredibly important for us more than anyone else to lead well
and to be very conscious of decency and dignity in in all of our work so I just
part that particular point in there and I think to your questions around Horkaidengi
addressing the over the temptation of Mardi and particularly around women
it is a long-term intractable challenge that is clearly not a corrections alone issue
we though have heard and understand our role and responsibility in ensuring that we don't sit on our hands and do nothing
and I think between yourself and other members historically of this
committee we have been challenging ourselves as to whether or not targets or
areas of focus are important to shift us away from not being able to apply
clear operationally relevant change to some of these matters and so to that end just last week
we had a pretty engaging conversation by that I mean constructive tension in an executive context
to ask ourselves were we super clear on where we thought we could have the biggest impact
to ensure that we were confident that we were doing all we could both in our agency as well as
across the sector to understand what is a small part but an incredibly important part of the growth
in the women's prison population which is those women who are coming into our part of the system
on relatively relatively low-level offenses that may have been recidivist in nature and so that's
an area that you have asked us about I think the chair had a particular interest in that
when we were last talking about about this as a sector and we have definitely enrolled
our colleagues in justice to understand the data to understand what's happening as this term what we
can practically do that actually starts to demonstrate that we can make a difference
at least in a small part rather than just keeping it in frameworks descriptions and
intent so that that is my reflection it's incredibly rewarding work incredibly difficult
work but I'm 100% proud of what I know to be the commitment that every single member of our
organization has in trying to make a difference and enable people to leave us in a better state
with broader prospects but it's a tough job but I'm delighted that we've got incredible people
doing that work every day hey well thank you for coming and I can assure you what we will
end with in our report is that we look forward to hearing your recommendations your new approach
blah blah blah what you can see thank you but hey look I want to thank you for your role I
know you're moving on but also to your team thank you we all recognize exceptionally challenging
environment you operate in but just thank you for coming in today appreciate it thank you
thank you Mr. Chair Mr. Chair yeah sorry could we just what do you think about just staying
in public session and getting on with the hearings and coming back to consideration on the
slide I'm just going to look at the officials can you come back um do you mind waiting just fight
for this yeah do you mind waiting and then we'll they don't they don't need to let afterwards say
yeah we don't we don't have officials on that okay all right thank you great so if we just
right we're going straight everyone we're going straight into uh a hearing
thank you my list is to
Piri Piri um Raquel uh Private Authority that's you fantastic please um come to the table
looking forward to hearing from you we're running just a little bit late um we've got five minutes with
you we've read your submission um so if you can just leave us a little bit of time for questioning
that would be fantastic
um
thank you my name is Hita Gardner I am here on behalf of the Piri Raquel Tribal Authority
as our kaiho too
the Piri Raquel Tribal Authority strongly opposes this bill that is our view that this
bill is a solution looking for a problem it offers no practical benefit but carries
significant constitutional and cultural risk English is already the dominant language of
our courts our schools commerce and in our streets around 95 percent of people here in
New Zealand speak English compared to 4.28 percent that speak Maori and 0.5 percent of the population
reported to be using sign language according to our most recent census data 95 versus 4.28
versus 0.5 the English language is not at risk so what problem are we actually solving
it was the Maori language that was removed from early childhood education material
it is the use of Maori language that has been reduced within government departments and in
some cases removed from correspondence with international partners the Maori Language Commission
has warned the Maori language is at risk and just this very week this week the Maori language
voices on our airways have been diminished with substantial funding cuts there is a genuine concern
for ewe radio
that is the Maori language that is under attack and a bill to affirm the status of the already
dominant language and now there was a waste of time and a waste of resource and a blatant
example of political Austria unlike te reo Maori and New Zealand sign language English
English is not vulnerable and does not require legislative protection elevating it to official
status doesn't improve public services it simply dilutes the specific protections meant
for at-risk languages te reo Maori is a taonga under article 2 of the treaty or Waitangi the
crown has a duty of active protection not just passive tolerance
when one language is still recovering from state sponsored suppression legislating the
dominance of the already dominant language is inconsistent with the principles of te te reo
Waitangi this bill doesn't sit in a vacuum it's part of a broader shift towards linguistic
monoculturalism it signals to Maori that our language and our place in public administration
is becoming at best optional or secondary and at worst now surplus to requirements
the bill states that legislative recognition of the status of English as an official language
will not affect the status or use of te reo Maori and New Zealand sign language as the two other
official languages in New Zealand will not affect the status or use of te reo Maori that's just not
true anti-te reo Maori sentiment is already been emboldened by government legislation we will
have dialogue suggesting we don't need to consider te reo Maori because the we use English and that
is already an official language of New Zealand that is the type of thinking that will infect
our society of this legislation is to pass and to think that might be the case is naive
can bust the opinions of those individuals that support this bill
and you'll find that very sentiment is prominent in the thinking
so what problem are we actually solving?
Pederaco tribal authority steadfastly opposes the English language bill
thank you very much i've got Dan Rose one who's going to ask you a question yeah hey thanks for
that contribution i was just wondering if there's been any international examples where you're seeing
where similar legislation has improved public or administration outcomes and if you have kind
of what lessons could we potentially take from that sorry could you could you ask the question
yes any examples internationally that have actually where a film like this has actually improved
public outcomes i'll see you mentioned here about the the danger of following the US model
has there been other other similar bits of legislation that have led to it being better
for the lives of the of that nation or so having a bill like this improving things yeah have you seen
so the like the opposite or no okay can i ask you a question that's very good submission in the
historical perspective is fascinating but you mentioned the treaty settlement process and
the obligations on the crown to up here to a whole up hold to rail you make the assertion that
my personal spell it may undermine previous trade or treaty settlements just want to ask you
to reflect on that because if that was a case then that would be incredibly significant but if i could
put a proposition to you i even if this bill passes it doesn't necessarily mean that there would be a
change in the name of places and geographical points of interest using the toro where that's
specified on a treaty treaty arrangement or are you suggesting otherwise it is our suggestion
that this will have a negative impact in the use and implementation of terrell model
and so that yes right but not in the region that talk about treaty claims
oh well the the degradation of terrell molly is uh is something that is maintained in most
treaty claims and so if that is is denigrated through legislation and that is a breach okay cool
hey thank you um i'll take one more question a bit over time but just so just to clarify you
mentioned about the their funding cuts as you put it um earlier um but my understanding is that
their time limited funding meaning that it was temporary it was never made what we call baseline
which means that it's guaranteed so can we please clarify that sure are you speaking of the
ewe radio funding that i alluded to yes um uh yes technically ewe radio has also been
funded for over 30 years and so whether technically it has been roll over funding for all of that time
um to me as a technicality it has been a consistent fund to support Maori language
aren't our ewe ways that has been there for decades that has now been slashed this amount was
time limited meaning it was temporary again um to me that's a semantics it's been supported for
decades all right hey look we're out of time but i want to thank you for coming today very good
historical context in your submission and uh appreciate you turning up in person thank you
thank you right um right uh right here there you are cool thank you we've seen you before yes yes
we've got a few people we've seen before in the yes um thank you for having me um as you'll you have
the submission if anyone has any questions like interrupt me at any point um otherwise i'm probably
telling the things you might already know i mean the the bit that's slightly interesting to me about
this is my view is that english is already an official language there's um probably some legal
debate so i would say it's de jure like as a matter of law it's an official language others
de facto official language um but you know it's so my suggestion would be be careful the
concept of official language is something we put on a lot of treaties you know signing with
countries which use other languages and so if there's any implication in passing this bill
that we're making english an official language for the first time rather than you know it's it's
been an official language under the common law and we're just moving into statute like we moved
you know the law of contempt of court into statute which members of this committee uh
will have sat through you know yeah that one one thing moving something that's in the
common law protected by that and now we're going to protect the statute but um be careful before
saying you know this is a this is not an official language at the moment and we're making it one
because that might have some effects for um things that have happened in the past where
some foreigner overseas has had to apply to a new zealand court in the in one of the
official languages of new zealand and they always do that in english um and uh if english
isn't an official language you know and so it's just mostly my submission is you know i don't mind
where the protection of english as an official language is you know it could be in the common
law as i would say currently is it could be in statute probably not much of difference but um be
careful in how you're doing this um we're very keen on your clause 17 which you haven't mentioned yet
so i'm hopefully dr shoe now and that's gonna talk about it yeah i think just to pick up on that
particular point you know there are other places where english is not an official language but a
defective language like england so are you saying that if they kept it as it is again from an
international law or convention perspective that remains it is but the minute you make it into an
official language then it has implications to work to any agreement prior to that uh it could
i mean like the risks are probably not that it's not going to happen a lot but you can imagine
someone trying it in a court you know and it's just like this isn't going to happen much you know
it's the risk you know it's that you could add or change a few words in the introduction
depending on how you put this into law if you do just to like make make sure everyone's clear you know
this it's always been an official language in new zealand or has been since you know 1840
would be my date um just be careful because if you say it's now an official language um you
know for the first time someone will make the argument and my guess would be like if someone
was to make the argument now they'd go to court and the court would tell them don't be silly
english is an official language of course you apply in a new zealand court in english
but this says use an official language and only there are only two official languages and the court
would just say you're wrong but if you put something in a statute which no no parliament's
actually very clear this is the first time english has ever been an official language um
someone someone will give it a go and someone will have to spend $10,000 in a lawyer defending
it and it's not going to make a difference but it'll be a waste of court's time and a waste
of other people's time and you can avoid that by changing one sentence right um Mr Todd Stinson
I think it was basically it because I think yeah so it's a drafting clarification yeah thank you for
that so just to clarify because we've all very keenly interested in this point what I take
out of what you've just said to the committee is that there is a potential risk you don't see
there's uh particularly significant none but we need to be mindful of the potential unintended
consequence yes and so I mean my suggestion would be that the way you do is you are moving
the prediction from the common law to the statute just like you did last time just in terms of
download statutes point once you start putting english as an official language and this is
something we're discussing again in which case it should have given the same level of treatment
across all official languages in which case you also see an argument could be made that everything
needs to be done in all three languages because all three languages are now completely equal
probably not I mean that that would probably more arise from the way the other laws are written
you know so uh you have the Māori Language Act or uh forget the current and New Zealand
Sign Language the law that made New Zealand Sign Language an official language you know
that has extra protections for those so you've got the former Māori Language Commission you've
got specific rights in the New Zealand Sign Language Act where you're allowed to use you know
New Zealand Sign Language as as of right in interacting with courts and all those sorts of things
those laws are currently for English you know the High Court rules says use English and so
you would probably need laws to change other laws you know New Zealand Sign Language legislation
if you wanted that sort of change it's not something that'll probably happen from this
thank you for tuning up again uh if I want to finish you about we um always good contributions
right now we're going to zoom uh are you there good afternoon you've got five minutes with you
Kia ora uh my name's Edimu um and I want to be really clear from the outset that I think this
bill uh has a potential to cause a lot of harm uh across our society um and I oppose it for a whole
bunch of reasons um I appreciate you've had a really busy day already so please bear with me
I'll take my written submission as read um I did answer the three questions that the committee
asked of submitters so um I'll just quickly go over with you why I believe that framing it as a
common sense tidy up or administrative tidy up uh to reflect a so-called linguistic reality
or our country is deeply concerning to me um I believe the harm that this bill will cause will
be measurable and long lasting um some may say it's only symbolic but symbolism shapes norms
which shapes behavior uh which shapes outcomes um and a law that singles out English like this
is meant to send a hierarchy symbol that English is the real language real language of the country
that it is the priority and that the other official languages are optional extras and
this matters because as we all know Te Reo Māori and New Zealand Sign Language were not made
official languages through tidy up processes they were fought for um and that was because
the users of those languages faced suppression exclusion and many many barriers to participation
in everyday life in our society and that's mostly by and large what official language status is for
it's to protect to resource and to normalize languages that have been marginalized um
I have got my notes up and I've got my submission up and I will leave a fair bit
of time for you to ask questions um but I just did want to also um go over the three reasons why a
government would undertake language planning um and this is language planning uh despite it being a
very poor attempt at it um so the three main reasons would be linguistic where a government
has specific aims around protecting a country uh protecting a language and as far as I understand
it this has not been given as one of the specific aims of this bill um and across the world you don't
get this with English because it is a dominant language it's a world language the second reason
why um a government undertakes language planning is semi-linguistic where they're attempting to
make societal functions easier so for example Germany reviewed its spelling system and the
government made official changes um for the sake of convenience uh China introduced a specific
pinyin in order to standardize things uh in communication um and the final reason why a
government might undertake language planning is extra linguistic so this is where governments
are giving specific languages specific status uh and role in law and policy
um and this is the most politically charged uh and motivated um where governments are directly
intervening in what goes on around language use in a country um and this can look like the planned
introduction of a of a mother tongue um as what happened in post-independence Malaysia um but it
can also look like uh designating what official language use is in a country
making English an official language is uh allocating legal recognition and institutional roles to a
language um our country is highly multilingual uh home to about 160 languages um so in countries
like ours uh language planning is mostly used to address the status and the resourcing of
minoritized marginalized and indigenous languages because by its nature the dominant language
does not require such designation in law as mentioned by other speakers um it is also
already de facto official um so this bill I believe primarily functions as a political
signal about national identity and creating a hierarchy of languages and which will have
real effects um and I want to meet some of the speakers before me who have outlined
the specific effects it will have on Tao Maori and Tangata Whenua and I would also
refer members of the select committee back to Waitangi Tribunal claim Y11 um and please just
go over and read that report it adds a lot of context to why designating English and official
language attempts to put it on a same level as Te Reo Maori and New Zealand Sign Language and
that is simply not the case um look I'll leave you a bit of time to ask me any questions
just about that time now but I'm gonna allow one question from Dr Sunan thank you uh thank you
for that submission Rimu um just quick question you mentioned language ideology and early on we
heard some it is mentioned about social cohesion and then that ties into following in terms of
like laws and et cetera what would be this bill in terms of language ideology mean
in the context of Aotearoa's history and the role of either Te Kanga Maori or Te Reo Maori
yeah um in the context of our history um we have spent a lot of time
um suppressing Te Reo Maori uh and New Zealand Sign Language but
putting it on a pedestal putting English on a pedestal like this implies that the use of
Te Reo Maori and NZSL has to be balanced against English um and this really really risks undermining
the language revitalization that has already happened um and continues to happen and will
happen regardless um in community but the point of entrenching um English as an official language
is ideological it is encouraging cultural dynamics um by implying that English isn't
well resourced that it isn't well supported um it's an entirely unnecessary bill it's not going
to solve any communication problems um because those problems do not exist it is ludicrous to
suggest otherwise um okay thank you thank you very much thank you for joining us this afternoon
and making that contribution kia ora thank you right now we've got the good professor um in the chair
we've got five minutes with you um your submission we've read and it's immensely short
yeah cool um kia ora et committee and as you know Dr Dean Knight Professor of Daward
they're handling a waka Victoria University and just let's be clear as as others submitted have said
English is already an official language of our nation and that is so understandably by
dint of custom and usage and the fact that it's status is not spelled out in legislation does not
alter that legal fact and I would point to the way that the authority of cabinet is not in any way
diminished by the fact that cabinet is not mentioned in any legislation at all and it's
only a creation of convention and and indeed I don't want to spend much time on that because
the bill admits that English already is an official language and that's nothing new I I've
I've seen similar advice from within government by dint of official information requests
from around the time of the passage of news and sign language uh uh bill uh to that effect it's it's
a long-standing understanding of government so it follows that from an instrumental point of view
this bill is entirely unnecessary legislative recognition um adds nothing from an instrumental
point of view and and I don't really want to be drawn into the political reasons why we may be
going through this whole exercise um that said I also can't strongly object or object too strongly to
be the spelling out of constitutional rules of which this is one inaccessible way that's a matter
of constitutional literacy and so um codification we have opportunities might be helpful in terms
of understanding well how what our constitution is and how it operates however my very strong
submission here is the proper place for this provision is in the constitution act and all
three official languages should then and there be spelt out in terms and I've given you some
suggestions in my uh submission about how you could do that and all I'd say is I'd invite
you to push your officials quite strongly about if you wanted to follow that path how you could
get that adopted within the scope of that bill that's the proper place or perhaps in the
Bill of Rights Act or somewhere else but spelling out all the three official languages and ways would
be if we're going to bother with codification that's a better way forward well I'm sure that the
honorable Dr Duncan Webb wants to raise the constitutional methods of this very thank you
again for coming in um look but my question is some languages seem a bit more official than others
in a kind of a really long way um in the sense that if I was given a speeding ticket in Te Rea
and didn't pay it I think I'd probably have an argument whereas if someone who is a today I speak
is given a speeding ticket in English they haven't got an argument so we've got the languages are
not of equal status um and I guess my question is if we start saying these languages particularly
in English which are written languages um of equal status where does that leave us
in that is there is there a dominant language by law or is that part of the customary law which is
kind of just the background noise that we live in well I just just to pick up on that point is
is is I'm I'm suggesting that we collect up out official languages and status is one thing how
that operates as a matter of constitutional systems and protections all those things may
vary between them and it's indeed that's why I specify in the possible language the recognize that
Te Rea Omadi is an official language in accordance with the provisions of the Māori Language Act
Te Rea Mou Te Rea Omadi and the same with News and Sign Language because it recognizes
that there is a system in a body of ways about expectations about how they are to be operated
I'm not suggesting from a codification point of view we should change that that's that's we should
accept what we've got now and spell that out what you seem to be speaking to is what's probably
the position in Canada where their two official languages spelled out I think in their charter it
is but actually expressly specifies that they are of equal status and effect and that is a
that's a different means of codification because it would be changing the status quo
I'm suggesting at the moment that you stick with the status quo and spell
Do you think the status quo would you say that's because it's got to be legal right yeah you know
like your analysis of customary law and its force would you say as a matter of custom English
is the de facto or the firstly well what I think my spending ticket about example it's not a
stupid one right and that in that sense in the language I use it's the regular day-to-day
basis within government surrounding status state-related proceedings that's that and you can
yeah that's the dominant and that's why we need the other language to spell done specified
to re-correct that and provide opportunities for other languages to be recognized so but it's not
I mean I'm a realist there is a reality that that we can't avoid here that English is the
dominant language of the government and of the state all right hey thank you again professor
for giving up a very meaningful contribution thank you thank you jettie de genre is she on the
TV jettie
hello
you're having a busy day I am yes right probably not as busy as you but anyway
all right we've got five minutes sorry yeah so well I've already introduced myself but in
case the people there are different so my name's not no they're all the same people
all right okay well I mean I have kind of asked myself why I felt strong enough to make a submission
on this bill because as has been pointed out many times English is already the dominant language
spoken here and it's really disconfirming the status quo but I feel that this bill is actually very
damaging to our national unity and also to our teriti relationships my parents were Dutch immigrants
and I mean my mother often used to say before she came to New Zealand there were two things she knew
about this country one was that it was the first country in the world to give women the vote and
the second was that it was an English-speaking country so they were in no doubt about that in
1951 and 1961 and nothing has changed since and I just don't see any reason to to formalize
the position that we already have um as my husband said in his submission it's a little
bit like proposing that the sparrow should be made an official bird because there are far more of them
here than Kiwis um I just feel like there's only negatives and disadvantages in progressing this
bill and my biggest concern is that it signals a real lack of respect from the government towards
our teriti partner um the official status reported to Teri Omari 50 years ago was only achieved
after a century of struggle to prevent its eradication and a huge effort on the part of Māori
leaders at the time and given that English is not endangered in Aotearoa, New Zealand or anywhere
else in the world I just feel it's insulting to record English the same status as our endangered
Teri Omari and it signals in the minds of myself and many people who have I guess similar views
to me are some sort of demotion of Teri Omari um English is the language of the colonizers and it
was a tool used by colonizers to suppress the indigenous language so elevating English to the
status of an official language signals to many that and especially to Māori return to those
colonial priorities and just a lack of good faith in our teriti partnership and I guess
it really just makes me ashamed to be a New Zealander you know there are so many um leadership
of tax attacks already on Teriti and Māori in the last few years this is just another one and
I want to live in a country that has a good international reputation as a country that honours
its promises and all of its people and this bill is just another example why I can't do that
um so yeah really that's just um my view and my presentation I feel that by engaging in this process
that the government doesn't it just gives me the impression of being petty and weak
um and it diminishes the manner of the government to be engaging in this process so
all right hey thank you thank you for your contribution again today um really appreciate you
taking the time to make a submission right thank you um we've got thank you uh
oh you're here please come to the yeah
Tiena koutou kouta tianataka ingoa and um as I'm sitting here today um I'm a mother
I'm an education professional and I'm a board member of a local school and I was really
thinking about what drove me to say yes and I'll give an oral submission and it's because
I want to represent the next generation of Kiwis I want their voices to be heard here today
because whatever decisions you make will impact them tomorrow so that's where I'm coming from but
also as I'm sitting in this room listening to these colleagues um esteemed colleagues from
universities and linguists I'm thinking isn't that poetic justice because I was born in Ukraine
and knowing the history of English language it originates from proto-euro-indoe-European
emerging 6,500 years ago and here I am today defending uh while it you know it's a language
that has evolved because of migration because of cultural exchange adaptation and borrowing
and here we are the majestic um poetic justice that we have to say no we don't want this to
be an official language and I do not support this bill because ultimately English is it's in it's
ascendancy it is growing populace um it speaks through it has spread through exploitation trade
and colonization it incorporated words from many cultures and adopted to new environments
was carried and reshaped by diverse people so English is fundamentally a language of movement
exchange and integration however there's another point I want to pick up on
and that's what the last speaker was starting to say as I was writing my submission it became
quite clear that the proposal to make English an official language must also be considered in a
broader broader environment many voters including myself are not simply evaluating your proposals
but we're also thinking about why this issue why now especially with everything that's going
on in the world at what cost to more pressing metrics at what cost to my children what are the
drivers behind prioritizing symbolic legislation such as this and these um and these concerns
we know that they consume parliamentary time attention they divert focus away from substantive
policy challenges and contribute to public cynicism about political motive
so the implications are quite clear given its history it's difficult to argue that
English requires protection through official status its strength lies in adaptability and
global reach not in legislative reinforcement at the same time elevating English formally
risks undermining efforts to revitalize te reo Maori creates tension with commitments
under tititi awhitangi and reinforces perceptions of exclusion again many voters like myself are
increasingly aware that our parliamentary process has been captured to delay distract and derail
meaningful progress for our children so here we are by culturalism and multiculturalism is what
needs to be protected in this context we're public confidence and political priorities is already
strained advancing symbolic religious legislation of this kind risks reinforcing the view that
parliamentary process like this is not aligned with the needs of the people it serves to represent
okay thank you i've got a question from dr sunan thank you thank you this good to see you again
something you mentioned in terms of English being essentially a chimeric language really struck
with the fact do you see any challenges or confusion around not specifying what kind of
English and people then debating on whose English is the official English most probably but humans
evolve in so do languages and so do cultures so of course it's going to create those problems
what is the official language i mean slang well everything um it will create problems down the
end to not just an exclusionary factor all right hey thank you for making the effort to come on
behalf of the next generation and speaking to us today thank you thank you right we've got our
last submitter who is online good afternoon
are you there
hi you might need to unmute
did i
nice to see you now we've got five minutes we've read your submission maybe highlight and then we
might have a question or two for you can you see me and yes yes
okay
um so this is an individual submission uh but i just have to let you know i'm a lecturer of
education primary teaching i'm also a new member to the tertiary education union council so i'm with
but it's an individual submission goodbye i'm just going to get straight to it
and meet you under code date um so i'm here to to express my strong opposition to the English
language bill thank you for the opportunity to speak today um this bill solves no problems
delivers no practical benefit and uses public money and parliamentary time on an issue that
simply doesn't exist english already functions as a dominant language of government or education
and public life in ulterra it is the language of parliament the courts the public service and
almost in all official communications sorry i'm probably gonna not take a breath just carry on
reading there's no evidence of confusion disadvantage or administrative difficulty arising from english
not being explicitly named in legislation in fact government officials have publicly stated
that legislating english would make no practical difference to how the system operates so
we're here debating a bill that changes nothing in practice it still requires policy development
legal drafting departmental analysis and full parliamentary processing all of that comes at
a real cost to taxpayers at a time when public services are under pressure when health education
housing and justice all face significant challenges it is difficult to justify spending
public money on a bill that does not improve outcomes for anyone beyond the waste of resources
there is a deeper concern uh although the bill claims it does not diminish the status of
te reo Maori many new cylinders are worried that the message it sends um english is not
endangered uh it does not require protection uh te reo Maori on the other hand has required
decades of revitalization efforts supported by progressive governments by elevating english and
statute uh when it is already dominant already in official domains this bill risks being used
rhetorically to push back against bilingualism or to question the presence of te reo Maori in
public spaces even if that is not the intent it may be the effect you know just move my notes up
sorry
distillation needs to strengthen social cohesion not create new points of tension
it should also respond to genuine public need there is no evidence that new cylinders are calling
for this bill there's no evidence of harm that it addresses and there's no evidence that we
it will improve clarity efficiency or fairness in public administration what it does do is divert
time money and attention away from areas where legislative action could make a meaningful
difference such as reinstating te ahu o te reo for kaiako and schools across aotearoa for these
reasons i respectfully urge the committee to decline the progress of the english language boom
thank you very much hey look i want to thank you for your submission um we've heard a number of
submissions so i don't think you should take out of it that we have enlisted what you've said uh
and but i want to thank you for making a submission and being with us today
okay right um nice to see prisa um right we're going into private session